
# The problem of predicting evolution

Adaptive evolution is a universal process, affecting humans, plants and microbes alike. Beginning with Darwin's semminal work, 'On the Origin of Speceis' in 1859, scientists have found countless examples of adaptive evolution. Despite this progress, we are still largely unable to predict how any population will evolve. Solving this problem is critical not only for improving our fundamental understnading of the natural world, but also for developing medical treatments that avoid antibiotic resistance in patients or promote human microbiome health and resilience, assisting conservation efforts by quantifying the viability of species over evolutionary time, developing interventions to combat climate change, and developing and optimizing industrial bioproduction technologies.

One possible solution to the problem of predicting evolution is a mechanistic approach, where we model how genome sequence translates to both evolutionary fitness and organismal, population and community level phenotypes, and from this fundamental model simulate how evolution in this system would proceed. However, we are currently far from being able to implement either of these methods. Biological systems are incredibly complex: there are vastly more possible genomes of length 1Mb -a typical bacterial genome size- than atoms in the observable universe. We thus cannot simply measure genotype, phenotype and fitness of every possible community. We also lack the mechanistic models to accurately translate genotype to phenotype and fitness.

Alternatively, we can take a statistical approach, by quantifying the initial conditions and evolutionary outcomes of many populations and developing a predictive statistical model. However, this approach suffers from both a diffculty of observation and a limitation of sample size. Many studies have identified numerous parameters of the natural world that are important for determining the evolutionary trajectory of a population (e.g. the initial phenotype and distribution of the species in question, the distribution of other species in the community, the abiotic environment etc.). As evolution often occurs over the scale of thousands or millions of years, inferring all of these parameters for an ancient population is extremely challenging to do with any accuracy. Furthermore, natural populations lack technical replication, which is critical for the study of evolution as laboratory studies have shown that replicate populations evolving under identical conditions can substantially differ in how they evolve (e.g. Lenski and colleagues citrate utilization evolution).

Recent efforts have suggested new paths forward. Controlled laboratory evolution studies have shown that evolution can be highly repeatable. An important sub-problem is to determine the extent to which evolution can be repeatable and identify paramters (species genotype, community composition, abiotic environment etc.) that can explain evolutionary outcomes and the repeatability of evolution. One recent success in this effort has been the finding that adaptive mutations systematically provide a smaller fitness advantage when they occur in higher-fitness genotypes. Recent models suggest that this pattern of diminishing returns epistasis can be explained by idiosyncratic (i.e. random) interactions between mutations.

# The repeatability of evolution in microbial communities

These studies, however, have largely focused on characterizing evolutionary parameters and outcomes in terms of genotype and evolutionary fitness in microbes evolved in isolation. However, most systems of interest consist of a community of interacting organisms with a focus on organismal and community-level traits such as pathogen infectivity, invasion tolerance and resilience, species diversity and ecosystem function. We have little systematic understanding of how traits, particularly community-level traits, evolve.

The goal of my research program is thus to identify general empirical patterns governing the evolutionary process, with a focus on the evolution of community-level traits. The key challenge is to determine the distribution of adaptive mutations available to an evolving community, the effects of these adaptations both on traits and on evolutionary fitness, and then determine how the initial parameters (e.g. species composition, nutrient availability, temperature etc.) alter these distributions. Species interactions are a fundamental feature of the natural world, from bees pollinating plants to viruses infecting humans. These interactions influence many ecological traits, from species abundance and distribution to global carbon and nitrogen cycling. Species can adaptively evolve in response to these interactions, potentially altering organismal and community level traits, which can lead to further adaptive evolution. While there is substantial evidence that such eco-evolutionary feedbacks occur, we are essentially unable to predict the evolutionary trajectory of any community. My research program will use controlled laboratory manipulations, combined with genetic, phenotypic and evolutionary measurements and analysis to understand how communities adapt.

asd
# Mapping genotype to (organismal and community) phenotypes and fitness
asd
# Identifying generalizable patterns of community evolution
asd
